<!-- 
.. title: 1 * '1' = '1'
.. slug: 1-1-1
.. date: 2014-12-04 21:36:49 UTC+08:00
.. tags: Code
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

There are some days I wish Python is strongly typed. And today is one of them. 

### Background
I work on an algorithm trading desk. Our algorithm trading engine is in Python. For a few days my team has been working on a new feature which can assign a "weight" to each trading strategy, so for example if a strategy has a weight of 2, then each trading order it sends will automatically has its size doubled up. 

Last night the development work was done. I run the tests, merged back to development branch, and deployed to our simulation environment. 

This morning when I came into office, I was greeted by an error: basically it was shouting at me that the volume field in an order should be a number, not a string. 

This has never happened before. 

### What happened

My first instinct is I could just add a simple `int()` wrapper around the volume field and back to my breakfast. Luckily I didn't and instead sat down to find the bug. 

It turns out as we're reading the weights from a config file, but without properly converting it into an integer, so the weight stays as a string and everytime it's applied to order volume, Python won't complain about type mismatch, instead something like below happens:

```python
1 * '1' = '1'
```

And an order with size '1', not number 1 is sent. 

### Why didn't my tests fail? 

We have both unit tests and integration tests (where a dummy strategy will run throught the whole market data --> trading signal --> trading execution process). 

In this case I didn't update the integration tests to include the weight. And in our code the default weight is 1 (NOTE: not '1'), so the tests happily passed. 

### Remediation

Just add an `int()` coersion when reading the weight from the config file. 

I also included the weight field in my tests. 

### The real danger

It only occurred to me in the afternoon that if this has not been properly fixed, real disaster could happen: 

Imagine a strategy with weight = 1 emits a trading signal with size = 3: 

```python
3 * '1' = '111'
int('111') = 111  #ahhhh fat finger
```

Now I don't even want to think about what `5 * '1'` would turn out. 

### Takeaways

- NEVER blindly coerce types.
- Always update tests with new features. 
- It's important to trace down to the root cause of a bug. 
